      
      
     DATA BRIEF 
     June 2026 | OEI-09-24-00331 
     Medicare Advantage Organizations 
     Overturned Nearly All Appealed 
     Prior Authorization Denials for 
     Skilled Nursing Facility Admission, 
     Raising Concerns About Initial 
     Denials 
      
      
                             OIG.HHS.GOV 
          
         June 2026 | OEI-09-24-00331 
         Medicare Advantage Organizations Overturned Nearly All 
         Appealed Prior Authorization Denials for Skilled Nursing Facility 
         Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials 
         Why OIG Did This Review 
         •   Previous OIG work raised concerns that Medicare Advantage organizations’ (MAOs’) use of prior 
             authorization can in some cases result in denials and delays in access to needed care for enrollees.  MAOs 
             that inappropriately deny care are not delivering the full value that taxpayers pay them to provide. 
         •   OIG identified denials of prior authorization requests for post-acute care after a hospital stay as a 
             particular area of concern.  This report highlights new analyses of denial and overturn rates of requests for 
             admission to skilled nursing facilities (SNFs), which provide short-term skilled nursing and/or therapy 
             services to help patients recovering from an illness, injury, or surgery.   
         What OIG Found 
                                    •    In June 2024, the 19 MAOs in this review collectively denied 12 percent of 
                                    requests for SNF admission.  MAO denial rates ranged from 23 percent to 0.4 percent. 
                                    •    Enrollees and their providers appealed 18 percent of SNF denials.  When SNF 
                                    denials were appealed, MAOs overturned 95 percent in favor of the enrollee.  The 
                                    extremely high overturn rate indicates that some enrollees were initially denied 
                                    medically necessary care and raises concerns about denials that were not appealed.  
             •   The MAO contractor naviHealth processed half of all requests for SNF admission and denied 14 percent 
                 of them—a higher denial rate than MAOs that processed requests internally (11 percent) and other 
                 contractors (9 percent).  MAOs later overturned 97 percent of SNF denials issued by naviHealth when 
                 enrollees appealed.  This raises concerns about whether contractors are receiving appropriate training 
                 and oversight from MAOs.  NaviHealth is a subsidiary of the MAO United Health Group, Inc. 
             •   MAOs and their contractors denied requests for SNF-level care from nursing home residents 40 
                 percent of the time, a much higher rate than requests from all other enrollees (11 percent).  
         What OIG Recommends 
             To identify and respond to concerning patterns of prior authorization denials, CMS should regularly collect 
             request-level prior authorization data that include service type and contractor information (see our 
             companion report, OEI-09-24-00330).  Further, CMS should: (1) take action to address any breakdowns in 
             the initial reviews of SNF admission requests that are driving the extremely high overturn rate of SNF 
             admission denials, (2) assess reasons for variation in SNF denial rates across MAOs and contractors and 
             take action as appropriate, and (3) assess reasons for the differences in SNF denial rates between nursing 
             homes and non-nursing home residents and take action as warranted.  CMS did not explicitly concur or 
             nonconcur with our three recommendations.  
                                                                        
         
        Primer: Medicare Advantage and Post-Acute Care  
        Medicare Advantage  
        People who are eligible for benefits under original Medicare may choose to receive their Medicare coverage 
        through Medicare Advantage plans administered by Medicare Advantage organizations (MAOs).  In 2024, 
        54 percent of people with Medicare (32.8 million people) were enrolled in Medicare Advantage, and the 
                                                                                           1, 2  
        Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) paid MAOs an estimated $494 billion.    
                                                                                          3
        Medicare Advantage plans must cover at least the same services as original Medicare.   MAOs are expected to 
        implement critical program controls to avoid unnecessary costs and ensure program integrity while at the 
        same time ensuring that enrollees can get necessary and appropriate care.  To do that, MAOs may impose 
        additional administrative requirements, such as requiring prior authorization before certain services can be 
        provided.  For example, MAOs may require prior authorization for services with a history of improper 
                                                                                    4
        payments in original Medicare, such as requests for skilled nursing facility care.    
        Under Medicare Advantage’s payment model, MAOs are paid a risk-adjusted, capitated payment each month 
                                                                                 5
        for each enrollee regardless of the number of services the enrollee receives.   A central concern about 
        capitated payment models is the potential incentive for insurers to deny enrollees’ access to services in an 
        attempt to increase profits.  Inappropriate denials of care can have serious impacts for enrollees’ health, and 
        MAOs that inappropriately deny care are not delivering the full value that taxpayers pay them to provide.  
        Facility-Based Post-Acute Care for Medicare Advantage Enrollees 
        Post-acute care facilities provide medical, therapeutic, and rehabilitative care to patients, typically after a 
        qualifying stay in a general acute-care hospital, to help patients regain the ability to return to their home or 
                          6
        community setting.   For patients who need post-acute care, the hospital care team typically helps to identify 
        which post-acute care setting is appropriate for them.  After considering patient needs and preferences, the 
                                                                     7
        hospital submits a request for admission to the selected facility.   The post-acute care facility then conducts its 
        own assessment to determine whether the patient meets its admission criteria.  Post-acute care facilities 
                                               8                                      9
        include long-term care hospitals (LTCHs),  inpatient rehabilitation facilities (IRFs),  and skilled nursing facilities 
              10, 11
        (SNFs).         
            Long-term care hospitals             Inpatient rehabilitation            Skilled nursing facilities 
            (LTCHs) provide acute care to        facilities (IRFs) provide           (SNFs) provide short-term 
            patients who need hospital-          intensive therapy and medical       skilled nursing or therapy 
            level care for extended              services in a hospital              services to patients for 
            periods of time.  LTCHs              environment to patients with        rehabilitation following 
            provide specialized services         complex nursing, medical            inpatient hospital stays, such 
            such as respiratory therapy,         management, and                     as for joint replacement or 
                                                                    
            head trauma treatment, and           rehabilitative needs.               stroke. 
            pain management.                                                          
        If a post-acute care facility approves a patient for admission, and the patient’s MAO requires prior 
        authorization for post-acute care, then the facility or the hospital care team must request authorization for 
        the post-acute care stay from the MAO.  The MAO reviews prior authorization requests to determine whether 
        to approve or deny the request; this review can occur internally in the MAO or the MAO may contract with 
        another company to conduct the review.12  If the MAO or its contractor denies the request for post-acute care, 
                                                                           13
        the patient or their care team can appeal the denial back to the MAO.  
                                                               
         
        Nursing Homes and Skilled Nursing Care 
        Nursing homes typically operate as both skilled nursing facilities (SNFs), where they provide short-term skilled 
        care following a hospitalization, and as nursing facilities, where they provide lower intensity routine nursing 
        care (often referred to as “custodial care”) for individuals with functional and/or cognitive impairments.  
        Medicare pays for short-term SNF care after a hospitalization for enrollees who require skilled nursing care 
        and meet other Medicare coverage requirements (as described above).  Medicare does not pay for room and 
        board services, routine nursing care, or assistance with activities of daily living for nursing facility residents 
        (i.e., those staying longer than 100 days).  Those services are largely covered by Medicaid, other private 
        insurance plans, or residents’ out-of-pocket payments.  Nursing home residents sometimes shift back and 
        forth between receiving short-term SNF-level care following a hospital stay, and once discharged from that 
                                                      14
        care, receiving less intensive long-term care.  
        Related Work 
        This report is part of a body of work that the Office of Inspector General (OIG) has conducted related to 
        denials of care in managed care programs.  This report also has a companion report, OEI-09-24-00330, which 
        analyzes MAO data on prior authorization requests for LTCH and IRF stays.  In future work, OIG will conduct an 
        in-depth review of a sample of case files to examine MAOs’ processes for reviewing prior authorization 
        requests for post-acute care. 
        In a 2022 report, OIG physician reviewers found that among the prior authorization requests (for all service 
                                                                             15
        types) that MAOs denied, 13 percent met Medicare coverage rules.   In other words, these services likely 
        would have been approved if the patients had been enrolled in original Medicare rather than in Medicare 
        Advantage.  One of the prominent service types that was denied even though the requests met Medicare 
        coverage rules was requests for post-acute care.  Denying requests that meet Medicare coverage rules may 
        prevent or delay enrollees from receiving medically necessary care and can burden providers. 
        In a 2018 report, OIG found that when enrollees and providers appealed denied requests between 2014 and 
                                                                                                           16
        2016, MAOs overturned about 75 percent of their own prior authorization and payment denials.   This 
        indicates that at least some of these denials were inappropriate or could have been avoided, given that 
        ultimately the plans agreed to authorize the medically necessary services and make the payments.  OIG also 
        found that CMS cited more than half of audited Medicare Advantage contracts in 2015 for inappropriately 
        denying prior authorization and payment requests.  
        OIG has also conducted work related to denials of care and payment in Medicaid managed care and Medicare 
               17, 18, 19, 20 
        Part D.      
        How OIG Did This Review 
        To calculate denial and appeal rates for SNF admission requests, we collected data from the 19 largest MAO 
        parent companies by enrollment about the prior authorization requests that they or their contractors 
        processed in June 2024.  To resolve any discrepancies in the data and to better understand the trends in our 
        analysis, we followed up in writing with select MAOs.  We also interviewed patient advocacy and industry 
        organizations to hear their perspectives.  The analysis in this report provides important insights about prior 
        authorization patterns across companies and indicates opportunities for followup and potential action, but we 
        cannot determine from this data analysis alone whether or how many of these denials were inappropriate. 
        The 19 MAOs in this study had 29.3 million people enrolled in their Medicare Advantage contracts in June 
        2024, which represented 86 percent of enrollment in the Medicare Advantage program at that time (see 
        Appendix A).  
                                                                   
               
              FINDINGS 
                       Overall, MAOs denied 12 percent of requests for SNF 
                       admission; denial rates ranged from 23 percent to 0.4 percent 
                                   In June 2024, the 19 MAOs in this review denied around 13,500 of 109,400 requests 
                                   for SNF admission (12 percent).  Denial rates for SNF admission requests varied 
                                   among the 19 MAOs with some MAOs denying requests at much higher rates than 
                                   their peers (see Appendix B for MAO request volume and denial rates).   
              Exhibit 1: Humana Inc.; CVS Health Corporation; and UnitedHealth Group, Inc., received the 
              most requests for SNF admission and had three of the five highest denial rates 
              Source: OIG analysis of June 2024 SNF prior authorization data for MAOs that received at least 50 SNF requests. 
              Note: CVS Health Corporation is the parent company of Aetna. 
               
              MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
              for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                                      Findings | 1 
               
                                   The three largest MAOs by enrollment (UnitedHealth Group, Inc.; Humana Inc.; and 
                                   CVS Health Corporation) received three-quarters of the SNF requests and denied 
                                   them at some of the highest rates.  Nearly 20 million people were enrolled in plans 
                                                                         21
                                   operated by these 3 companies.   (See Appendix A for information on MAO 
                                   enrollment.)  In addition to the three largest MAOs, some of the smaller MAOs also 
                                   had higher denial rates, but they reviewed far fewer SNF cases.  For example, Molina 
                                   Healthcare, Inc., denied 23 percent of requests for SNF admission—nearly double the 
                                   overall SNF denial rate.   
                                   Although no specific denial rate is expected or correct, the wide variation in MAO 
                                   denial rates for SNF requests is concerning because it is unclear why some MAOs had 
                                   denial rates that were much higher than their peers.  Extremely high or low denial 
                                   rates may indicate differences in MAO policies or performance, such as how they 
                                   interpret or apply coverage criteria.  In future work, OIG will conduct an in-depth 
                                   review of a sample of case files to examine MAOs’ processes for reviewing prior 
                                                                                      22
                                   authorization requests for post-acute care.  
                                   Denial rates for SNF admission were higher among for-profit MAO 
                                   contracts than nonprofit MAO contracts  
                                   Differences in denial rates between for-profit and nonprofit MAO contracts suggest 
                                   that financial incentives may be partially driving higher denial rates among some 
                                   MAOs (see Appendix E for details).  MAOs can operate for-profit contracts only, 
                                   nonprofit contracts only, or both types of contracts.  The MAO with the highest SNF 
                                   denial rate, Molina Healthcare, Inc., operated only for-profit contracts at the time of 
                                   our review, as did the three largest MAOs.  (See Appendix A for the number of for-
                                   profit and nonprofit contracts operated by each MAO.)     
                                   Exhibit 2: For-profit MAO contracts denied SNF admission requests at a 
                                   higher rate than nonprofit contracts  
                                   Source: OIG analysis of June 2024 MAO SNF prior authorization data and 2024 contract tax status from 
                                   CMS’s Health Plan Management System. 
                                   MAOs have a financial incentive to deny SNF-level care and instead approve a lower 
                                   level of care, such as home health services or outpatient therapy.  Although 
                                   information about what MAOs pay to different types of providers is not available, 
                                   payment amounts in original Medicare can provide helpful context for the relative 
               
              MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
              for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                                      Findings | 2 
            
                            cost of care in each setting.  The average cost of a SNF stay in original Medicare in 
                                                                                                    23, 24
                            2023 was $16,000, while average home health care costs were only $6,000.         
                  MAOs overturned nearly all denials for SNF admission when 
                  enrollees appealed, indicating that some enrollees were 
                  initially denied medically necessary care  
                            The appeals process is an important safeguard to help ensure that patients have 
            18% of SNF      access to needed services.  Enrollees and providers appealed around one-fifth of 
            denials were    requests for SNF admission that MAOs denied in June 2024 (approximately 2,400 of 
            appealed        13,500 denials).  For the 82 percent of denials that were not appealed, the patient 
                            may have requested a lower level of care (e.g., home health), paid for SNF-level care 
                            out of pocket, or gone without post-acute care. 
                            Among the denials of SNF admission that enrollees appealed, the 19 MAOs in this 
                            study overturned 95 percent in favor of the enrollee (2,313 of 2,445 appeals).  The 
                            high overall overturn rate was driven largely by the MAO UnitedHealth Group, Inc., 
                            which received 42 percent of the SNF appeal requests and overturned them 99.7 
                            percent of the time.  In addition to UnitedHealth Group, Inc., all of the MAOs that 
                            received at least 50 appeals had extremely high overturn rates (see Appendix B for 
                            overturn rates by MAO).   
           Exhibit 3: Overturn rates for denials of SNF admission were extremely high across MAOs that 
           received at least 50 appeals 
           Source: OIG analysis of June 2024 SNF appeals data for MAOs that received at least 50 appeals. 
                            Among MAOs with at least 50 SNF appeals, the overturn rate ranged from nearly 91 
                            percent for BCBS of Michigan Mutual Insurance Co. to 100 percent for Elevance 
                            Health, Inc.  Among the smaller MAOs that did not receive at least 50 SNF appeals 
                            each, the combined overturn rate was only 59.5 percent.   
                            This analysis provides important insights about overturn patterns across companies 
                            and indicates opportunities for followup and potential action, but we cannot 
            
           MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
           for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                Findings | 3 
             
                               determine from this data analysis alone whether or how many of these denials were 
                               inappropriate.  However, the extremely high overturn rate of appealed SNF 
                               admission denials raises concerns that more initial SNF requests should have been 
                               approved rather than denied because the MAO ultimately determined the requested 
                               care was medically necessary.  Although overturned denials mean that the enrollee 
                               was eventually approved to receive the requested care, each overturned denial 
                               represents a case in which the patient or their provider had to file an appeal to 
                               access SNF services that were medically necessary and covered by Medicare.  This 
                               extra step may add unnecessary complexity and administrative burden for enrollees, 
                               providers, and MAOs, and may have delayed enrollee access to SNF care.  
                    Enrollees who appealed SNF denials typically received a 
                    decision 6 days after their initial request, with some waiting 
                    much longer  
                               For enrollees who appealed prior authorization denials for SNF admission, the typical 
                               (i.e., median) wait time from the initial request date to the appeal decision date was 
                               6 days.  Many enrollees waited longer to receive a final appeal decision—17 percent 
                               of SNF appeals took 10 days or longer.  In contrast, when MAOs approved the initial 
                               request for SNF admission, they typically approved the request on the same day that 
                               the request was made, enabling a much faster discharge from the hospital.   
                    Exhibit 4: Enrollees who appealed SNF admission denials typically waited 6 days to 
                    receive a final decision 
                    Source: OIG analysis of MAO SNF appeals data for June 2024 denials.  The timeline shows the median number of 
                    days between each step for denials that were appealed.   
                               Enrollees who are requesting post-acute care, including those appealing denials, are 
                               usually receiving care in an acute-care hospital while they wait for the MAO’s 
                               decision.  Other research has shown that Medicare Advantage enrollees stay in the 
                               hospital longer than enrollees with original Medicare before being discharged to a 
                                   25
                               SNF.   Unnecessary or “avoidable” days spent in a hospital can mean a significant 
                                                                                               26, 27
                               financial cost to hospitals that is not separately reimbursable.      Delayed 
                               discharges can also negatively affect patients’ psychological and social well-being and 
                                                                                                                     28
                               contribute to feelings of uncertainty and stress about their recovery and prognosis.   
             
            MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
            for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                        Findings | 4 
               
                       The MAO contractor naviHealth denied SNF requests at a 
                       higher rate than MAOs that processed requests internally; 
                       many of these denials were later overturned by MAOs 
                                   MAOs can choose to process SNF requests internally or can hire contractors to 
                                                                        29
                                   process the requests for them.   Across the 19 MAOs in our review in June 2024, 
                                   68 percent of SNF requests were processed by contractors and 32 percent were 
                                   processed by MAOs internally.   
                                   The MAO contractor naviHealth denied one in seven requests for 
                                   SNF admission 
                                                                                                                               30
                                   The contractor naviHealth (a subsidiary of the MAO UnitedHealth Group, Inc. ) 
                                   processed half of all requests for SNF admission among the 19 MAOs in June 2024.  
                                   Most of the SNF requests that naviHealth reviewed (63 percent) were for 
                                   UnitedHealth Group, Inc., but naviHealth also processed requests for BCBS of 
                                   Michigan Mutual Insurance Co., Highmark Health, and Humana Inc.   
                                   Exhibit 5: The MAO contractor naviHealth denied requests for SNF admission 
                                   at a higher rate than other contractors and MAOs that processed requests 
                                   internally  
                                   Source: OIG analysis of June 2024 MAO SNF prior authorization data. 
                                   NaviHealth denied 14 percent of requests for SNF admission, a higher rate than 
                                   requests that were reviewed internally by MAOs (11 percent) or reviewed by other 
                                   MAO contractors (9 percent) (see Appendix C).  As found in our companion report, 
                                   naviHealth also denied requests for admission to LTCHs and IRFs at higher rates than 
                                                                      31
                                   MAOs and other contractors.   Variation in denial rates between contractors and 
                                   MAOs that review requests internally raise concerns about whether the contractors 
                                   are receiving appropriate training, guidance, and oversight from MAOs on how to 
                                   assess requests. 
               
              MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
              for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                                      Findings | 5 
               
                                   MAOs overturned SNF requests denied by all contractors, 
                                   including naviHealth, at high rates upon appeal  
                                   Although many MAOs used contractors to review initial prior authorization requests, 
                                   they reviewed any appeals internally.  SNF denials issued by both naviHealth and 
                                   other contractors were overturned at higher rates on appeal than denials that MAOs 
                                   reviewed internally.   
                                   Exhibit 6: SNF denials issued by MAO contractors were more likely to be 
                                   overturned upon appeal than denials issued by MAOs 
                                   Source: OIG analysis of June 2024 MAO SNF appeals data. 
                                   Higher overturn rates of denials issued by contractors could indicate differences in 
                                   policies or procedures between the parent company and its contractor or differences 
                                   in interpretation of CMS coverage rules.   
                       Nursing home residents were more likely than other enrollees 
                       to be denied admission to SNF-level care 
                                   MAOs denied 40 percent of requests for SNF admission for people who lived in 
                                   nursing homes around the time of their request (i.e., “long-stay” residents with more 
                                                                           32
                                   than 100 days in a nursing home)  but denied only 11 percent of all other requests.  
                                   Nursing home residents submitted around 3 percent of requests for SNF admission to 
                                   the 19 MAOs in June 2024 (approximately 3,200 out of 109,400 requests).  We 
                                   examined denial rates by other enrollee characteristics but noted smaller differences 
                                   (see Appendix D).   
                                   Exhibit 7: Nursing home residents were more likely than other enrollees to 
                                   be denied admission to SNF-level care 
                                   Source: OIG analysis of June 2024 MAO SNF prior authorization data and 2024 data on enrollee 
                                   nursing home stays from the Minimum Data Set. 
               
              MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
              for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                                      Findings | 6 
               
                                   MAOs indicated that for enrollees who are denied SNF-level care, including nursing 
                                   home residents, the MAO may authorize less costly intermittent skilled nursing 
                                                                                         33
                                   services and/or outpatient therapies instead.   As shown in Exhibit 8, the care 
                                   requirements for patients in SNFs are more frequent than for patients in long-term 
                                   nursing facility care.  MAOs pay for the full cost of care for patients in SNFs.  For 
                                   patients in long-term nursing facilities, MAOs pay for outpatient health care services 
                                   only; they do not pay for room and board or other routine, non-skilled care. 
              Exhibit 8: Care requirements are more intensive—and MAO costs are higher—for short-term 
              SNF care than for long-term nursing facility care 
              Source: OIG analysis of CMS coverage rules for long-term care and SNFs. 
                                   MAOs offered explanations for why nursing home residents may be less likely than 
                                   other enrollees to meet SNF coverage rules  
                                   When asked what factors might cause the SNF admission denial rate to be higher for 
                                   nursing home residents than for other enrollees, some MAOs reported that nursing 
                                   home residents are less likely to meet the admission criteria for daily SNF-level care 
                                                                                                                                   34
                                   because they already have some intermittent skilled therapy supports available.   
                                   Other MAOs stated that nursing home residents may have a more complex medical 
                                   history than enrollees who are able to live elsewhere, including more severe or 
                                   compounded physical or cognitive functional impairments.  MAOs stated that a 
                                   complex medical history, regardless of where the enrollee resides, may diminish the 
               
              MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
              for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                                      Findings | 7 
               
                                   enrollee’s ability to meaningfully participate in daily skilled therapies in a SNF, and 
                                   thus may lead to a higher denial rate. 
                                   Patient advocates and nursing home industry organizations stated that an 
                                   enrollee’s place of residence should not affect whether they meet criteria for SNF 
                                   admission 
                                   When asked about the difference in denial rates between nursing home residents 
                                   and other enrollees, representatives from patient advocacy and nursing home 
                                   industry groups told OIG that, in their view, an enrollee’s place of residence should 
                                   not affect whether they meet the criteria for admission to a SNF.  One representative 
                                   stated that long-term custodial care in a nursing facility, even with outpatient 
                                   therapies (e.g., physical therapy) or intermittent skilled nursing care, is not a clinically 
                                   equivalent substitute for the care management and daily therapy and/or daily skilled 
                                   nursing that is provided as part of SNF-level care.  Another representative stated that 
                                   skilled clinicians can adapt therapies for people with physical or cognitive functional 
                                   impairments such as dementia, and that SNFs report that people with those 
                                   impairments still benefit from those therapies.   
                      The MAO contractor naviHealth denied SNF requests for nursing home residents at a 
                          higher rate than MAOs that processed requests internally or other contractors 
                   In August 2025, OIG reached out to five of the largest MAOs to request additional information 
                   about their reviews of SNF admission requests from nursing home residents.  All of the MAOs 
                   reported that they use the same Medicare coverage rules to review all SNF requests.  However, 
                   three of the MAOs reported that their contractor naviHealth had supplemental guidance for 
                   reviewers on how to review requests for nursing home residents.  The guidance instructed 
                   reviewers to consider the reasons that the enrollee lives in a nursing facility.  According to the 
                   guidance, those reasons frequently impact a patient’s ability to meaningfully participate in daily 
                   skilled therapy.  Our analysis showed that in June 2024, naviHealth denied SNF requests for 
                   nursing home residents at a higher rate than other contractors or MAOs that processed requests 
                   internally.   
                   Source: OIG analysis of June 2024 MAO SNF prior authorization data and 2024 data from the Minimum Data Set.  
               
              MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
              for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                                      Findings | 8 
               
              CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
                                   More than half of people with Medicare were enrolled in Medicare Advantage in 
                                   2024, and MAOs received an estimated $494 billion to cover at least the same 
                                   services as original Medicare for these enrollees.  MAOs are expected to implement 
                                   critical program controls to avoid unnecessary costs and ensure program integrity 
                                   while at the same time ensuring that enrollees can get necessary and appropriate 
                                   care.  However, our findings show patterns of denial and appeal outcomes for SNF-
                                   level care that raise concerns.  
                                   The high concentration of enrollees in a few large MAOs, and the use of contractors 
                                   to process prior authorization requests, means that the policies and performance of a 
                                   few companies can impact care for millions of people.  Overall, MAOs denied 12 
                                   percent of requests for SNF admission in June 2024 (approximately 13,500 of 109,400 
                                   requests).  However, across MAOs, people living in nursing homes were denied SNF-
                                   level care 40 percent of the time.  When enrollees appealed (18 percent of SNF 
                                   denials), MAOs nearly always overturned the denial, particularly among the larger 
                                   MAOs and MAO contractors.  The high overturn rates raise concerns that some 
                                   enrollees may have been inappropriately denied access to SNF-level care at their first 
                                   request.  These findings warrant further scrutiny from CMS.   
                                   As enrollment in Medicare Advantage continues to grow, so does the urgency and 
                                   importance of ensuring that MAOs are delivering on the value that the Federal 
                                   Government pays them to provide.  Given OIG’s body of work that has raised 
                                   concerns about enrollee access to care in Medicare Advantage, CMS should collect 
                                   more comprehensive data to efficiently and effectively identify MAOs with 
                                                                                                              35
                                   problematic patterns of denials and take action as appropriate.   In our companion 
                                   report, OEI 09-24-00330, we made a recommendation that is also relevant to 
                                   addressing the issues raised in this report.  Specifically, we recommended that CMS: 
                                                 Regularly collect request-level prior authorization data that include 
                                                                                                                   36
                                                 standardized service type and contractor information.    
                                   This will enable analysis of prior authorization data by service type, such as the 
                                   analysis that we conducted in this report.   
                                   Based on the findings of this report, we further recommend that CMS: 
                       Take action to address any breakdowns in the initial reviews 
                       of SNF admission requests that are driving the extremely high 
                       overturn rate of SNF admission denials 
                                   Given the extremely high overturn rate of SNF denials when enrollees appeal, CMS 
                                   should engage with MAOs to identify the reasons for the high overturn rate and take 
               
              MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
              for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331           Conclusion and Recommendations | 9 
               
                                   corrective action as appropriate.  High overturn rates when enrollees appeal could 
                                   indicate problems with the MAO’s or contractor’s initial review process, such as 
                                   misinterpretation or misapplication of CMS coverage rules.  High overturn rates could 
                                   also indicate that providers are not submitting all needed documentation at the first 
                                   request and are adding documentation with appeal submissions.  Whatever the 
                                   reasons for the high overturn rates, action is needed to ensure that MAOs and 
                                   contractors have the documentation and processes that they need to make the 
                                   correct decision at the initial request and that enrollees receive needed services 
                                   without the delay and added burden for all parties of going through the appeals 
                                   process.  
                       Assess the reasons for variation in SNF denial rates across 
                       MAOs and contractors and take action as appropriate  
                                   CMS should identify the reasons for the variation in prior authorization denials for 
                                   SNF admission and, if needed, take appropriate steps to address the differences.  
                                   Variation in denial rates could indicate differences in program integrity efforts or 
                                   misinterpretation or misapplication of CMS coverage rules.  Extremely high denial 
                                   rates may indicate inappropriate denials.   
                                   For example, CMS could engage with the MAOs that we identified with high denial 
                                   rates for SNF admission to determine whether they are meeting program 
                                   requirements and take corrective action as appropriate.  CMS could also engage with 
                                   MAOs that employ contractors with high denial rates to determine whether the 
                                   contractors are receiving appropriate training, guidance, and oversight from MAOs to 
                                   comply with Medicare coverage rules. 
                       Assess reasons for the differences in SNF denial rates between 
                       nursing home residents and other enrollees and take action as 
                       warranted 
                                   CMS should examine the reasons why MAOs are denying access to SNF-level care for 
                                   nursing home residents at nearly four times the rate of nonresidents and, if needed, 
                                   take appropriate steps to address the difference.  To do this, CMS could conduct 
                                   targeted case file reviews or focus groups with MAOs and SNFs.  CMS should take 
                                   appropriate steps to clarify for MAOs, SNFs, hospitals, and Medicare Advantage 
                                   enrollees whether and how nursing home residency affects an enrollee’s ability to 
                                   meet coverage criteria for SNF admission.     
               
              MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
              for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331          Conclusion and Recommendations | 10 
               
              AGENCY COMMENTS AND OIG RESPONSE 
                                   CMS did not explicitly concur or nonconcur with our three recommendations.  CMS 
                                   stated that it uses several oversight tools, including annual audits, to ensure that the 
                                   Medicare Advantage program provides adequate health care access to enrollees.   
                                   Regarding our first recommendation—to take action to address any breakdowns in 
                                   the initial reviews of SNF admission requests that are driving the extremely high 
                                   overturn rate of SNF admission denials—CMS stated that, through its annual audits, 
                                   it will continue to evaluate whether MAOs applied clinical criteria in accordance with 
                                   CMS rules and appropriately adjudicated prior authorization determinations.  
                                   However, CMS did not indicate whether and how it would target SNF denials in 
                                   future audits or other oversight efforts.  We ask that CMS include any specific plans 
                                   or actions to address breakdowns in the initial reviews of SNF admission requests in 
                                   its Final Management Decision. 
                                   Regarding our second recommendation—to assess the reasons for variation in SNF 
                                   denial rates across MAOs and contractors and take action as appropriate—CMS 
                                   stated that it has launched a Medicare Advantage data collection pilot.  Plans that 
                                   have volunteered to join the pilot will report service-level prior authorization data, 
                                   and CMS will analyze the data, including denial rates by service type and third-party 
                                   vendors (i.e., contractors).  However, it is unclear how CMS could recalculate SNF 
                                   denial rates across MAOs and contractors through the data collection pilot because it 
                                   does not include the data needed to conduct such analyses (i.e., standardized service 
                                   type data on requests for SNF admissions and contractor names).  In its Final 
                                   Management Decision, we ask that CMS specify what steps it has taken or is planning 
                                   to assess the reasons for variation in SNF denial rates across MAOs and contractors 
                                   that we identified in this report.   
                                   Regarding our third recommendation—to assess reasons for the differences in SNF 
                                   denial rates between nursing home residents and other enrollees and take action as 
                                   warranted—CMS stated that it can target denials of SNF services as part of its 
                                   program audits and would consider our findings when deciding next steps.  However, 
                                   CMS did not indicate whether and how it would target SNF denials for nursing home 
                                   residents in future audits or other oversight efforts.  We ask that CMS include any 
                                   specific plans or actions to assess reasons for these different SNF denial rates in its 
                                   Final Management Decision. 
                                   For the full text of CMS’s comments, see Appendix F. 
              MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
              for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331        Agency Comments and OIG Response | 11 
              
             METHODOLOGY 
                                MAO Selection 
                                To select the MAOs for this review, we used CMS Part C (i.e., Medicare Advantage) 
                                enrollment data to identify the largest MAO parent companies by enrollment.  We 
                                selected the 19 parent companies that had at least 200,000 people enrolled in any 
                                Medicare Advantage contract in June 2024.  These 19 parent companies operated 
                                contracts in 55 States and territories and covered 29.3 million people (see Appendix 
                                A).  The companies covered approximately 86 percent of total Medicare Advantage 
                                enrollment in June 2024. 
                                Data Collection 
                                From each of the 19 selected MAOs, we collected a list of all prior authorization 
                                requests for admission to SNFs that the MAOs or their contractors processed during 
                                June 2024.  For each prior authorization request, the MAOs provided detailed 
                                information, including:  
                                    •    Enrollee identification numbers for enrollees who requested the service 
                                    •    An open text description of the service requested 
                                    •    A service type label (SNF) 
                                    •    The outcome of the initial request (approved or denied) 
                                    •    The name of the MAO contractor that processed the request (if applicable) 
                                    •    Whether the request was appealed and the appeal outcome 
                                    •    Key dates (e.g., date of request, initial decision, appeal) 
                                Where appropriate, we followed up with MAOs to resolve discrepancies in the 
                                submitted data. 
                                In addition to collecting data from MAOs, we also analyzed data from the Medicare 
                                Enrollment Database, CMS’s Health Plan Management System, and CMS’s Minimum 
                                Data Set. 
                                Analysis 
                                Denial rates.  We calculated the number and rate at which the selected MAOs denied 
                                prior authorization requests for SNF admission in June 2024 (see Appendix B).  First, 
                                we summed all denials of requests for SNF admission across the 19 MAOs.  To 
                                calculate the denial rate, we divided the total number of denials by the total number 
                                                                                                                           37
                                of prior authorization decisions that MAOs issued for SNF admission in June 2024.   
             MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
             for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                       Methodology | 12 
               
                                   We also calculated these rates by MAO to examine the distribution of rates across 
                                   MAOs and to identify MAOs with particularly high rates.  For the overall and MAO-
                                   level analyses, we included both requests processed internally by the MAOs and 
                                   requests submitted to the MAOs that were processed by their contractor(s), if 
                                   applicable (see Appendix B). 
                                   Tax status.  To examine denial rates by tax status for each setting, we used data from 
                                   CMS’s Health Plan Management system to categorize contracts as for-profit or 
                                   nonprofit/not-for-profit and then determined differences in denial rates (see 
                                   Appendix E).  
                                   Appeals.  To calculate the appeal rate, we divided the total number of appeals by the 
                                   total number of initial denials issued across all MAOs.  To calculate the overturn 
                                   rates, we summed the total number of approved appeal decisions and divided by the 
                                   total number of approved or denied appeal decisions.  We calculated overturn rates 
                                   by MAO for MAOs that processed at least 50 appeals (see Appendix B). 
                                   Timelines.  To examine the typical timelines for requests, we used the following date 
                                   fields: initial request date, initial request decision date, appeal date (if applicable), 
                                   and appeal decision date (if applicable).  Because outliers can affect the average 
                                   (mean), we used the median (middle) number of days to represent the typical wait 
                                   time between dates.   
                                   MAO contractors.  To examine the denial and appeal outcome rates by MAO 
                                   contractor, we calculated the rates by contractor across any MAO that they 
                                   processed requests for.  We compared the contractor rates with the rates for 
                                   requests that were processed internally by MAOs (see Appendix C).    
                                   Nursing home resident analysis.  To examine the SNF admission denial rate for 
                                   nursing homes residents, we used 2024 Minimum Data Set assessment data for the 
                                   enrollees in our population.  We followed the methods described in CMS’s MDS 3.0 
                                   Quality Measures User’s Manual to group assessments into episodes and to identify 
                                                                38
                                   nursing home residents.   We identified nursing home residents as those with a 
                                   “long-stay” episode (i.e., where the cumulative length of time in the facility for that 
                                   episode was 101 or more days).  To account for patients who may have left the 
                                   nursing homes for extended hospitalization, we included patients with long-stays 
                                   that ended up to 2 months before our June 2024 timeframe (i.e., long-stays that 
                                   ended after April 1, 2024).  We calculated denial rates for enrollees who were 
                                   classified as long-stay and compared that rate to the denial rate for all other 
                                   enrollees (see Appendix D). 
                                   To better understand the difference in denial rates for nursing home residents 
                                   compared to other enrollees, we followed up in writing with five of the larger MAOs.  
                                   To hear perspectives from patient advocacy and industry organizations, we 
                                   interviewed representatives from the Center for Medicare Advocacy, LeadingAge, 
                                   and the American Healthcare Association. 
              MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
              for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                               Methodology | 13 
               
                                   Dual eligibility analysis.  To examine the SNF admission denial rate by dually eligible 
                                   enrollees and Medicare Advantage-only enrollees, we used data from the Medicare 
                                   Enrollment Database to categorize enrollees by whether they were dually eligible for 
                                   Medicare and Medicaid.  We then determined differences in denial rates by dually 
                                   eligible and not dually eligible (i.e., Medicare Advantage-only) (see Appendix D).  See 
                                   our companion report, OEI-09-24-00330, for differences in rates for LTCH and IRF 
                                   admission requests by enrollee characteristics. 
                                   Limitations 
                                   This report analyzed data provided by the selected MAOs.  We followed up with 
                                   MAOs to resolve discrepancies in the submitted data, but we did not review medical 
                                   records to independently verify the accuracy of the data.  
                                   We also analyzed Medicare data and Minimum Data Set data on nursing home 
                                   residents.  We did not independently verify the accuracy of these data for this study.  
                       Standards 
                                   We conducted this study in accordance with the Quality Standards for Inspection and 
                                   Evaluation issued in 2020 by the Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and 
                                   Efficiency.  
                                    
                                    
              MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
              for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                               Methodology | 14 
            APPENDICES 
            Appendix A: Enrollment in the Sampled MAOs, June 2024 
            The 19 MAOs included in this review enrolled between 219,000 and 9.5 million people in June 2024.  
            Service areas for these MAOs covered all 50 States, the District of Columbia, and 4 territories (Guam, 
            the Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands). 
                                                                Number of States        Number of       Number of 
            MAO Parent Organization              Enrollment   and/or Territories in     Nonprofit        For-Profit 
                                                                     Service Area        Contracts        Contracts 
            UnitedHealth Group, Inc.              9,489,175                    55                0              64 
            Humana Inc.                           6,167,833                    55                0              42 
            CVS Health Corporation                4,275,902                    55                0              41 
            Elevance Health, Inc.                 2,029,692                    55                1              41 
            Kaiser Foundation Health              1,908,557                     9                7               1 
            Plan, Inc. 
            Centene Corporation                   1,140,398                    37                1              85 
            BCBS of Michigan Mutual Ins.            709,396                    55                2               4 
            Co. 
            The Cigna Group                         593,784                    55                0              14 
            Highmark Health                         421,249                    55                7               0 
            GuideWell Mutual Holding                333,565                    52                1               5 
            Corporation 
            Healthfirst, Inc.                       297,333                    51                3               1 
            MHH Healthcare, L.P.                    290,618                     2                0               2 
            SCAN Group                              277,975                     5                6               0 
            Molina Healthcare, Inc.                 253,749                    16                0              18 
            Corewell Health                         249,561                    51                3               0 
            Aware Integrated, Inc.                  227,548                    55                2               0 
            Health Care Service                     224,292                    55                4               5 
            Corporation 
            Devoted Health, Inc.                    223,423                    13                0              24 
            UPMC Health System                      219,213                    54                2               2 
            Total                                29,333,263                     -              39              349 
            Source: OIG analysis of CMS Medicare Advantage contract and enrollment data for June 2024. 
            MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
            for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                 Appendix A | 15 
                Appendix B: Volumes and Rates of SNF Prior Authorization 
                Requests and Appeals by MAO, June 2024 
                MAO                                      Initial           Initial           Denial          Appeals            Appeals          Overturn 
                                                   Approvals             Denials               Rate      Overturned              Upheld               Rate 
                Aware Integrated, Inc.                     620                 28              4.3%                   1                 0                  - 
                BCBS of Michigan                         2,336                241              9.4%                 68                  7           90.7% 
                Mutual Ins. Co. 
                Centene Corporation                      2,459                291            10.6%                  33                  2                  - 
                The Cigna Group                          2,466                239              8.8%                 48                  2           96.0% 
                Corewell Health                            658                 27              3.9%                   0                 0                  - 
                CVS Health Corporation                 13,938              2,170             13.5%                 375                  7           98.2% 
                Devoted Health, Inc.                       793                 99            11.1%                    6                24                  - 
                Elevance Health, Inc.                    6,475                786            10.8%                  93                  0            100% 
                GuideWell Mutual                           553                 30              5.1%                   6                 1                  - 
                Holding Corporation 
                Health Care Service                        695                 50              6.7%                   2                 0                  - 
                Corporation 
                Healthfirst, Inc.                          723                 25              3.3%                   3                 0                  - 
                Highmark Health                          1,754                168              8.7%                 12                  6                  - 
                Humana Inc.                            22,880              3,570             13.5%                 619                 53           92.1% 
                Kaiser Foundation                        1,298                212            14.0%                  17                 22                  - 
                Health Plan, Inc. 
                MHH Healthcare, L.P.                       241                   1             0.4%                   0                 0                  - 
                Molina Healthcare, Inc.                    453                138            23.4%                    8                 5                  - 
                SCAN Group                                 253                   4             1.6%                   0                 0                  - 
                UnitedHealth Group,                    36,124              5,362             12.9%              1,022                   3           99.7% 
                Inc. 
                UPMC Health System                       1,210                 17              1.4%                   0                 0                  - 
                Total                                  95,929             13,458             12.3%              2,313                132            94.6% 
                Source: OIG analysis of June 2024 MAO SNF prior authorization data. 
                Note: SNF prior authorization denial rates were calculated only for MAOs that received at least 50 SNF requests; overturn 
                rates were calculated only for MAOs that received at least 50 SNF appeals. 
                MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
                for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                                                Appendix B | 16 
                Appendix C: Volumes and Rates of SNF Prior Authorization 
                Requests and Appeals by Contractor, June 2024 
                                                             Initial           Initial         Denial         Appeals          Appeals         Overturn 
                Reviewing Entity                        Approvals            Denials             Rate  Overturned            Upheld by               Rate 
                                                                                                             by MAOs              MAOs 
                naviHealth                                  47,285             7,891            14.3%            1,520                 53          96.6% 
                MAOs – internal                             31,345             3,867            11.0%               565                73          88.6% 
                Other contractors                           17,299             1,700             8.9%               228                 6          97.4% 
                (excluding naviHealth) 
                                          Carelon             4,822              707            12.8%                91                 0         100.0% 
                                     CareCentrix              1,786              216            10.8%                36                 3                 - 
                                          EviCore             3,131              279             8.2%                50                 2          96.2% 
                                        WellMed               4,041              287             6.6%                44                 0                 - 
                Contractors not listed above                  3,519              211             5.7%                  7                1                 - 
                Source: OIG analysis of June 2024 SNF prior authorization data. 
                Note: Overturn rates were calculated only for reviewing entities that received at least 50 SNF appeals.
                MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
                for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                                                Appendix C | 17 
            Appendix D: Volumes and Rates of SNF Prior Authorization 
            Requests and Appeals by Enrollee Characteristics, June 2024 
             Enrollee Characteristic                                        Initial         Initial          Denial 
                                                                       Approvals          Denials              Rate 
             Nursing home residents                                         1,965           1,283             39.5% 
             All other enrollees                                           93,964          12,175             11.5% 
             Enrollees eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid             31,810           5,912             15.7% 
             (“dually eligible”) 
             Medicare Advantage-only enrollees                           64,119             7,546             10.5% 
            Dually eligible enrollees were more likely to be denied SNF admission than enrollees who 
             were not dually eligible, even after accounting for nursing home residency status 
            Source: OIG analysis of June 2024 SNF prior authorization and appeals data, enrollee demographic data from the Medicare 
             Enrollment database, and 2024 data on enrollee nursing home stays from the Minimum Data Set.
            MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
             for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                       Appendix D | 18 
              Appendix E: Volumes and Rates of SNF Prior Authorization 
              Requests and Appeals by MAO Contract Profit Status, June 2024 
              MAO Contract Profit Status                                            Initial          Initial            Denial 
                                                                               Approvals            Denials               Rate 
              For-profit contracts                                                87,310            12,689               12.7% 
              Nonprofit/Not-for-profit                                              8,619               769               8.2% 
              Source: OIG analysis of June 2024 MAO SNF prior authorization data and 2024 contract tax status from CMS’s Health Plan 
              Management System.
              MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
              for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                                 Appendix E | 19 
              Appendix F: Agency Comments 
                       CMS’s official comments begin on the next page. 
              MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
              for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                                 Appendix F | 20 
              DATE:              May 4, 2026 
              TO:               Megan Tinker 
                                Chief of Staff 
              FROM:             Dr. Mehmet Oz 
                                Administrator 
                                Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
              SUBJECT:  Office of Inspector General (OIG) Draft Report: Medicare Advantage Organizations 
                                Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials for Skilled Nursing Facility 
                                Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331 
              The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) appreciates the opportunity to review and 
              comment on the Office of Inspector General’s (OIG) draft report. CMS is committed to program 
              integrity and its enforcement and oversight of the Medicare Advantage (MA) program.  
              MA plans are Medicare-approved managed care plans offered by Medicare Advantage Organizations 
              (MAOs), which are private companies, as an alternative to Original Medicare. MAOs must generally 
              cover the same benefits as Original Medicare, such as stays in Skilled Nursing Facilities (SNF). 
              However, as part of the managed care structure, MAOs may apply internal coverage policies that are no 
              more restrictive than original Medicare’s national and local coverage criteria that are based on current 
              evidence in widely used treatment guidelines or clinical literature to make medical necessity 
              determinations, as permitted in 42 C.F.R. § 422.101(b)(6).  
              For Medicare basic benefits, MAOs must make medical necessity determinations in accordance with all 
              medical necessity determination requirements, outlined at 42 C.F.R. § 422.101(c)(1); based on the 
              circumstances of each specific individual, including the patient’s medical history, physician 
              recommendations, and clinical notes; and in line with all fully established Traditional Medicare 
              coverage criteria. This includes established criteria in applicable Medicare statutes, regulations, National 
              Coverage Determinations (NCDs) or Local Coverage Determinations (LCDs).  
              CMS uses several oversight tools to ensure that the MA program provides adequate health care access to 
              enrollees. For example, as part of its oversight strategy, CMS conducts audits of a subset of MAOs each 
              year to assess compliance with the terms of their contracts with CMS, in particular the requirements 
              associated with access to medical services, drugs, and other enrollee protections required by Medicare. 
              The audit program operates on a continuous, rotating basis to promote broad coverage over time; 
              therefore, the MAOs selected for audit may vary annually, and not all MAOs are audited in a given year. 
              This approach allows CMS to be responsive and direct its audits to areas of identified concern, such as 
              service types with a high rate of denial. As designed, these audits extend beyond data analysis by 
              evaluating whether MAOs applied clinical criteria in accordance with CMS rules and appropriately 
              adjudicated those determinations. In cases where denied claims are overturned on appeal, CMS notes the 
              initial denial may still have been warranted if it stemmed from incomplete documentation that was 
               MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
               for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                                                        Appendix F | 21
              subsequently provided during the appeal. Following an audit, CMS notifies the plan of identified 
              noncompliance, such as when the plan’s denial of coverage does not align with CMS rules and may 
              prevent enrollees from accessing care. MAOs are then required to submit corrective action plans when 
              remediation is necessary to strengthen internal controls, prevent recurrence of noncompliance, and/or 
              address any impact to enrollees. Further, plans that are found to have significant or repeated violations 
              may be subject to penalties, such as Civil Monetary Penalties and intermediate sanctions (suspension of 
              payment, enrollment, and/or marketing activities). In recent years, CMS has increased the transparency 
              of noncompliance with CMS requirements by publishing Compliance and Enforcement actions on the 
              CMS.gov website1 and developing a publicly available annual report with business practices MAOs can 
              adopt to continue improving performance. 
              Recently, CMS has developed a data collection pilot called the Service Level Data Collection for Initial 
              Determination and Appeals.2 CMS implemented this new data collection in February 2026 and will 
              collect all service-level determinations, including prior authorization information across all settings, 
              including SNFs. Pilot plans will report whether a third-party vendor participated, in any capacity, in the 
              determination review or decision-making related to determination reviews and decision-making 
              processes (which include prior authorization requests). This data will permit CMS to analyze the 
              relationship between denial rates and whether a third-party vendor was involved with the plans 
              participating in the pilot. This data will also allow CMS to identify and analyze prior authorization 
              decisions by service type for pilot participants and whether there was vendor involvement. 
              OIG's recommendations and CMS's responses are below. 
              OIG Recommendation 
              CMS should take action to address any breakdowns in the initial reviews of SNF admission requests that 
              are driving the extremely high overturn rate of SNF admission denials. 
              CMS Response 
              As mentioned above, CMS’s broad oversight strategy includes auditing a varying selection of MAOs each 
              year to assess their compliance with contract terms, particularly regarding access to medical services, 
              drugs, and other enrollee protections required by Medicare. During these audits, CMS will continue to 
              evaluate whether MAOs applied clinical criteria in accordance with CMS rules and appropriately 
              adjudicated those determinations. CMS will also continue requiring MAOs to submit corrective action 
              plans when remediation is necessary to strengthen internal controls, prevent recurrence of noncompliance, 
              and/or address any impact to enrollees. 
              OIG Recommendation 
              CMS should assess the reasons for variation in SNF denial rates across MAOs and contractors and take 
              action as appropriate. 
              CMS Response 
              As mentioned above, CMS has launched a data collection pilot, in which MA plans volunteered to join. 
              Among other data, pilot participants will be reporting service-level prior authorization data, including 
              service types, across all settings. Pilot participants will also report information related to whether a third-
              party vendor was involved in the determination review and decision-making process. CMS will analyze 
              1
                Please see: https://www.cms.gov/medicare/audits-compliance/part-c-d/part-c-and-part-d-enforcement-actions 
              2
                Please see December HPMS memo here: https://www.cms.gov/about-cms/information-systems/hpms/hpms-memos-
              archive-weekly/hpms-memos-wk-3-december-15-19. 
              MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
              for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                                                        Appendix F | 22
              pilot denial rates by a number of characteristics, including by service and involvement of a third-party 
              vendor. CMS looks forward to gathering lessons learned from conducting this pilot, which will inform 
              our next steps. 
              OIG Recommendation 
              CMS should assess reasons for the differences in SNF denial rates between nursing home residents and 
              other enrollees and take action as warranted. 
              CMS Response 
              Under the Part C audit framework, CMS can already target denials of SNF services for review. CMS will 
              consider these findings when deciding next steps if audits confirm any link between denial rates and 
              enrollee setting.  
              CMS thanks OIG for their efforts on this issue and looks forward to working with OIG on this and other 
              issues in the future. 
               MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
               for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                                                        Appendix F | 23
              ENDNOTES 
              1 
               Meredith Freed et al., “Medicare Advantage in 2024: Enrollment Update and Key Trends” (Aug. 8, 2024).  
              Accessed on Dec. 1, 2025. 
              2
                MedPAC, Report to the Congress: Medicare Payment Policy, Chapter 11: The Medicare Advantage program: 
              Status report, March 2025.  Accessed on Oct. 20, 2025. 
              3 
               At a minimum, MAOs must cover the same services as in original Medicare, although they may also offer 
              supplemental benefits.  42 CFR §§ 422.101(a) and (b); 422.102.  MAOs are not responsible for paying hospice 
              care costs for beneficiaries; original Medicare pays these costs.
              4
                HHS, 2024 Medicare Fee-for-Service Supplemental Improper Payment Data.  Accessed on Aug. 18, 2025. 
              5
                5 CFR § 422.304. 
              6 
               American Hospital Association, “Fact Sheet: Post-acute Care” (July 2019).  Accessed on Dec. 1, 2025.   
              7 
               OIG interviews with post-acute care providers, industry groups, and hospitals, 2024.   
              8
                CMS, “What are Long-Term Care Hospitals?” (June 2019).  Accessed on Dec. 1, 2025. 
              9
                CMS, “Inpatient Rehabilitation Hospitals & Inpatient Rehabilitation Units” (November 2025).  Accessed on Jan. 
              6, 2026. 
              10 
                MedPAC, Report to the Congress: Medicare Payment Policy, Chapter 8: Skilled nursing facility services, March 
              2018.  Accessed on Jan. 6, 2026. 
              11 Although there are some circumstances in which a patient may receive care at an LTCH, IRF, or SNF without a 
              preceding acute-care hospital stay, for the purposes of this study, we refer to these facilities collectively as 
              “post-acute care facilities.” 
              12 MAOs are responsible for complying with coverage requirements even if they contract with another company 
              to conduct reviews.  42 CFR § 422.504(i)(1). 
              13 42 CFR § 422.578. 
              14 MedPAC, Report to the Congress: Medicare and the Health Care Delivery System, Chapter 5: Medicare 
              beneficiaries in nursing homes, June 2025.  Accessed on Dec. 1, 2025. 
              15 OIG, Some Medicare Advantage Organization Denials of Prior Authorization Requests Raise Concerns About 
              Beneficiary Access to Medically Necessary Care (OEI-09-18-00260), Apr. 27, 2022. 
              16 OIG, Medicare Advantage Appeal Outcomes and Audit Findings Raise Concerns About Service and Payment 
              Denials (OEI-09-16-00410), Sept. 25, 2018. 
              17 
                OIG, High Rates of Prior Authorization Denials by Some Plans and Limited State Oversight Raise Concerns About 
              Access to Care in Medicaid Managed Care (OEI-09-19-00350), July 17, 2023. 
              MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
              for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                                    Endnotes |24
              18 OIG, Keystone First Should Improve Its Procedures for Reviewing Service Requests That Require Prior 
              Authorization (A-03-20-00201), Dec. 20, 2022. 
              19 OIG, New York Did Not Ensure That a Managed Care Organization Complied With Requirements for Denying 
              Prior Authorization Requests (A-02-21-01016), Sept. 18, 2023. 
              20 OIG, Some Medicare Part D Beneficiaries Face Avoidable Extra Steps That Can Delay or Prevent Access to 
              Prescribed Drugs (OEI-09-16-00411), Sept. 19, 2019.  
              21 CMS, Medicare Advantage and Part D Enrollment Data, Monthly Enrollment by Contract, June 2024.  Accessed 
              on Jan. 30, 2025. 
              22 OIG, Medicare Advantage Organization’s Use of Prior Authorization for Post-Acute Care, OEI-09-24-00332, 
              expected to be issued in FY 2027. 
              23 MedPAC, Report to the Congress: Medicare Payment Policy, Chapter 6: Skilled nursing facility services, March 
              2025, p. 8.  Accessed on Dec. 1, 2025.  Original Medicare paid $25 billion for 1,583,000 SNF stays in 2023, for an 
              approximate average of $16,000 per stay. 
              24 MedPAC, Report to the Congress: Medicare Payment Policy, Chapter 7: Home health care services, March 
              2025, p. 10.  Accessed on Dec. 1, 2025. 
              25 NORC at the University of Chicago, Analysis of Hospital Discharges to PAC Settings Among Medicare 
              Beneficiaries, June 2025.  Accessed on July 11, 2025.  
              26 A survey of hospitalists found that post-acute care issues, including rejections of placements, was the most 
              common cause of delays in care that would likely lead to additional days in the hospital (i.e., “avoidable days”).  
              See Sajan Patel, Sasha Morduchowicz, and Nader Najafi, “Avoidable Days: Identifying and Quantifying Delays in 
              Inpatient Care,” Journal of Hospital Medicine (May 2017).  Accessed on Dec. 15, 2025. 
              27 Testimony of David Basel, Vice President of Clinical Quality and Population Health Officer, Avera, before the 
              United States House of Representatives Committee on Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health and 
              Subcommittee on Oversight, Medicare Advantage: Past Lessons, Present Insights, Future Opportunities (July 22, 
              2025).  Accessed on Dec. 1, 2025.  
              28 Kanishk Aggarwal et al., “Exploring the Ramifications of Delayed Hospital Discharges: Impacts on Patients, 
              Physicians, and Healthcare Systems,” Cureus, vol. 16, no. 5 (May 28, 2024).  Accessed on Dec. 15, 2025. 
              29 For the purposes of this report, we refer to any entity that performs tasks on behalf of an MAO as an “MAO 
              contractor.”  These entities may include “first tier” entities, which enter into a written arrangement with an 
              MAO to provide administrative services or health care services; “downstream” entities, which enter into an 
              arrangement below the level of the arrangement between an MAO and a first tier entity; and “related” entities, 
              which are related to the MAO by common ownership or control and perform some of the MA organization’s 
              functions under contract or delegation.  The MAO is responsible for assuring that its contractors and any 
              downstream contractors have the information necessary to know how to comply with the requirements under 
              the Medicare Advantage program.  CMS, Medicare Managed Care Manual, Chapter 11: Medicare Advantage 
              Application Procedures and Contract Requirements, Apr. 25, 2007.  Accessed on Dec. 1, 2025.  
              MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
              for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                                    Endnotes |25
              30 UnitedHealth Group, Inc., reported that “naviHealth is an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of UnitedHealth 
              Group . . . naviHealth is a first tier downstream contractor and delegate of various UnitedHealthcare entities and 
              also an affiliated entity through common indirect ownership by UnitedHealth Group.” 
              31 OIG, The Three Largest Medicare Advantage Organizations Denied Requests for Long-Term Acute Care and 
              Inpatient Rehabilitation at Some of the Highest Rates, OEI-09-24-00330, June 11, 2026. 
              32 For the purposes of this report, we defined “nursing home residents” as those who had a nursing home 
              episode of at least 101 cumulative days in a nursing facility that started before their SNF admission request and 
              ended any time after April 1, 2024.  This aligns with the definition of “long-stay” episodes in CMS’s MDS 3.0 
              Quality Measures User’s Manual, Version 17.  Accessed on Dec. 1, 2025. 
              33 MAOs may cover intermittent skilled nursing services and/or outpatient therapy in a provider’s office, a long-
              term care nursing facility, or in a patient’s home through home health services.   
              34 In order to meet the coverage criteria for admission to a SNF, enrollees must, among other requirements, 
              need daily skilled care (e.g., as intravenous fluids/medications or physical therapy), that is provided by or under 
              the supervision of skilled nursing or therapy staff, to improve or maintain the enrollee’s current condition or to 
              prevent or delay it from getting worse.  CMS, “Skilled nursing facility care.”  Accessed on Sept. 30, 2025. 
              35 At the time of our review, CMS did not regularly collect detailed, request-level prior authorization data from 
              all MAOs.  In December 2025, CMS solicited MAOs to volunteer for a prior authorization data collection pilot and 
              published the draft requirements for the data that it will be collecting.  The prior authorization data that CMS 
              plans to collect do not include a standardized service type variable for all service types or the name of the 
              contractor that processed the request (if applicable).  CMS, Service Level Data Collection for Initial 
              Determinations and Appeals - Pilot Participation, Dec.16, 2025.  Available at: https://www.cms.gov/about-
              cms/information-systems/hpms/hpms-memos-archive-weekly/hpms-memos-wk-3-december-15-19. 
              36 OIG, The Three Largest Medicare Advantage Organizations Denied Requests for Long-Term Acute Care and 
              Inpatient Rehabilitation at Some of the Highest Rates, OEI-09-24-00330, June 11, 2026. 
              37 
                We asked MAOs to report data based on the date that the initial request decisions were issued.  This means, 
              for example, that a request that an MAO received at the end of June but had not yet issued a decision for by 
              June 30, 2024, would not be included in our data.  Similarly, decisions issued by MAOs at the beginning of June 
              2024 may include decisions for requests that were received in May. 
              38 CMS, MDS 3.0 Quality Measures User’s Manual, Version 17.0, Chapters 1 and 4, January 2025.  Accessed on 
              Dec. 1, 2025. 
              MAOs Overturned Nearly All Appealed Prior Authorization Denials  
              for SNF Admission, Raising Concerns About Initial Denials, OEI-09-24-00331                                    Endnotes |26
    Report Fraud, Waste, 
    and Abuse 
    OIG Hotline Operations accepts tips and complaints from all sources about 
    potential fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement in HHS programs.  Hotline 
    tips are incredibly valuable, and we appreciate your efforts to help us stamp 
    out fraud, waste, and abuse. 
                    TIPS.HHS.GOV 
                    Phone: 1-800-447-8477 
                    TTY: 1-800-377-4950  
    Who Can Report? 
    Anyone who suspects fraud, waste, and abuse should report their concerns 
    to the OIG Hotline.  OIG addresses complaints about misconduct and 
    mismanagement in HHS programs, fraudulent claims submitted to Federal 
    health care programs such as Medicare, abuse or neglect in nursing homes, 
    and many more.  Learn more about complaints OIG investigates. 
    How Does It Help? 
    Every complaint helps OIG carry out its mission of overseeing HHS programs 
    and protecting the individuals they serve.  By reporting your concerns to the 
    OIG Hotline, you help us safeguard taxpayer dollars and ensure the success of 
    our oversight efforts. 
    Who Is Protected? 
    Anyone may request confidentiality.  The Privacy Act, the Inspector General 
    Act of 1978, and other applicable laws protect complainants.  The Inspector 
    General Act states that the Inspector General shall not disclose the identity of 
    an HHS employee who reports an allegation or provides information without 
    the employee’s consent, unless the Inspector General determines that 
    disclosure is unavoidable during the investigation.  By law, Federal employees 
    may not take or threaten to take a personnel action because of 
    whistleblowing or the exercise of a lawful appeal, complaint, or grievance 
    right.  Non-HHS employees who report allegations may also specifically 
    request confidentiality. 
                                                              1 
              Stay In Touch  
              Follow HHS-OIG for up to date news and publications.  
                                                                                                OIGatHHS  
                                    HHS Office of Inspector General  
              Subscribe To Our Newsletter 
                                                                                                                                       
              OIG.HHS.GOV 
                                                                         
               
              Contact Us  
              For specific contact information, please  visit us online.  
              U.S. Department of Health  and  Human Services  
              Office of  Inspector General  
              Public Affairs  
              330 Independence Ave., SW  
              Washington, DC 20201  
              Email:  Public.Affairs@oig.hhs.gov  
               
               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1  
